The Joe Rogan experience.
We should fill people in on exactly what we're talking about.
So we're talking about a skeleton that was discovered that is 1.2 million years
older than Lucy. So yeah.
The skeleton is, yeah, it's 4.4 million years old.
The oldest known.
Human relative. Uh.
Well, it's the oldest known skeleton that actually this is an okay distinction I
should make. So, like I said before, skeletons are rare. Um,
this is the oldest skeleton. There are, uh,
three other members of the human family that are, uh,
older, but the thing is, they're much more fragmentary.
They're not anywhere near as complete. Like there's one,
another one from Ethiopia found by the same team that found the skeleton we're
talking about. Um, that's, you know, some, some teeth, you know,
like a towboat and a few other broken elements of the skeleton.
And there's another thing, uh, another species called Aurora or from Kenya,
which is about 6 million years old, again, you know,
much more fragmentary and teeth. I think they got a couple, um, thigh bones,
partial thigh bones.
And then there's a skull from Chad called style Anthropocene.
That's about, uh, 6 million, maybe seven years old,
depending on whose dating you believe. Uh, and that's, that's a very nice skull,
but it's a head without body. So, um, so, so anyway,
so there are, uh, people sometimes get confused by that.
So Hardy is indeed the oldest skeleton it's by far more complete than this other
stuff. Uh, but, uh, there are some, you know,
fragmentary things that are older and they all become part of the story too.
What is.
The, what is the scientific controversy? Do you think it's,
is it based on real skepticism or
it is ego involved in this? Like you're laughing.
What are you talking about, man?
A lot of egos involved in science, unfortunately. Right. There's a lot of egos.
There's a lot of disbelief, uh, because the,
the skeleton was so surprising in a lot of ways.
And so contrary to the predictions that many
people in science had made, that there was a kind of like a, you know,
a head exploded for a lot of people, you can.
Break down those particular things that are different than what was expected.
Right. First of all, we walked up. Right?
Yeah. So it, it, it walked up, right. So it's primitive. I mean, if you saw it,
you know, if we could go back at a time machine and look at it, you know, this,
this thing that the species name is Ardipithecus reminisce,
that's kind of a mouthful,
but RD is the individual skeleton that they found is that's,
you know, the individual like, like you're Joe,
you're the individual and your species is homo sapiens.
So that's how you think about this Arctic, the Ramadan species already,
the individual skeleton. So, um, uh,
so the interesting revelations with it is it has upright posture,
so it's standing upright, but it's still got the opposable toe.
So this is a creature that was in the trees, um, you know,
clearly climbing, but it also, uh, you know,
appears to be upright, uh, walking with this opposable tope. So it, it seemed,
it, you know, everyone knows that sometime deep in the human past,
there was some kind of a boil ancestor, you know, some kind of ape, but,
you know, the question has always been, what, what,
what kind of Abe does it looked like a modern ape or does it look like,
you know, something we've never seen before? And, um,
uh,
so the surprising thing about already is it's actually quite different than the
living apes. Um, so it, yeah, so it's got this opposable toe walks up,
right. Are there, are there proportions.
When chimps have shorter legs and they have arms,
are these proportions similar to that?
Uh, don't already.
I mean, it's certainly more ape-like than, than, than, than any of us.
Uh, but it's, uh, there's a couple of interesting things about its proportion.
So all the other living apes have longer arms than they do legs,
or they spend a lot of time climbing. That's, you know, that's long arms long,
and they have, you know, the different proportions,
but they all had that in common.
They got longer forelimbs than Highlands RD was a big surprise
because it actually had longer legs than forelimbs. I mean, you know, it,
it definitely has bigger hands as longer arms than we do, but, uh,
you know, that was a surprise, at least to me.
And I think that'd be some of the researchers. Um, and you know,
I was talking before about these kind of, um,
surprises that appear after the fact, well, that,
that was one because the bones are broken. You know,
these guys on this research team, it's called the,
the middle of the squash research project. Um, they spent a lot of time,
you know, reconstructing this and then estimating, you know, how,
what are the length? So the pieces that are not there and then, you know,
run all kinds of regressions and a lot of calculations and stuff. But, uh,
so that revelation was sort of a delayed,
you know, delayed bombshell, if you will, that it actually had, uh, Islam,
proportions of that were more like a bypass.
Um, and so, uh, ours, our legs are longer,
chimps have longer arms. So is this like, does it have almost equal length,
arms and legs? Like, can we actually just put a photo of it up here?
I'm getting a chance to take a look at, oh, it's fascinating.
So it has long legs, almost like a person,
but longer arms than we do. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Longer arms than we do for sure. I think, uh, I don't remember the exact name,
but I think the calculation they did it was the legs are, um, uh,
oh, I think, I think the arm, yeah.
I want to say it's like nine 90 something percent,
so it's pretty close to one-to-one um, of, uh,
length, but indeed the, the arms are, uh, a bit shorter.
So the.
Surprising part was that it didn't walk at all and its knuckles being th that it
was that old. Uh.
Yeah. So, so the, okay,
so humans are, we come from the African apes.
That's pretty clear from genetics. That's been clear for a long time. Um,
there are two bank groups of African apes there's, uh,
gorillas and there's chips.
Now within those and shifts also includes this other species you might've heard
of called Bonobos. And then within those there's like debate about, you know,
should we divide them into some subspecies and stuff, but you know,
I don't worry about that for now, but anyway,
what they all have in common is they knock a walk.
So they got these long fingers and when they walk, you know, I mean,
they do this. I mean, if you look at a video sometime you'll see it. And,
um, you know, because our two closest cousins both do that,
you know, there was a perfectly plausible theories that, um,
human ancestors did it well. So we evolved from a knuckle walking ancestor.
I mean, there was even a cover story in nature that, that the title,
the headline was almost that, you know,
humans evolved from a knuckle walking ancestor. Uh, so, um, yeah,
so that was, that was the theory. And then, so here with already,
we have a creature that's, you know, it's, it's,
it's not the last common ancestor with the African
apes, but it's, it's, it's certainly getting closer.
It's getting a big step closer. And, uh, the people, you know,
the anatomists who specialize in these things say that there's like,
no hint of knuckle walking, not, not only was it not knuckle walking, uh,
to get around,
but also it has no vestige of a knuckle walking
ancestry. So in other words,
there's no like residual anatomy that would suggest that.
Yeah. So it was bipedal from the very early days.
At very, very early days of.
The species evolution. Well.
It seems it's by Peter at that, at that for,
you know, 4.4 million year old window, and that, you know,
what comes before that is, is the speculation. It, yeah. I mean, it's, you know,
these, the people that do this, you know, it's,
it's intelligent speculation obviously,
but you don't know what you haven't found. And so, um,
uh, you know, now the, the, I mean,
there's a debate about just how long ago the last common ancestor of humans and
chimps lived. Um, it's probably at least, you know,
anywhere from 1.5 million years before already to, you know,
some estimates put it even further back than that. So yeah, the,
the there's another school of that's kind of emerged that says, well,
it still could be a knuckle walking ancestor, you know,
that gave rise to humans and RD, but it just,
all this stuff had disappeared by the time you got to already. Anyway, that's,
that's kind of a counter argument that we can get more into that later.
I don't want to get too esoteric on you, but, um, but it.
Seems so fascinating that it has these really long arms. Uh,
but that there's no evidence whatsoever of not only knuckle walking
in that species,
but knuckle walking as an ancestry episodes of the Joe Rogan experience
are now three on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st to December 1st,
they're going to be available everywhere, but after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.